Hey guys, welcome back to the course.
Ok, so we've rather pedantically defined what that dusty thing
sitting on your desk is, what it does,
and what makes it so special.
It's called a computer and it uses a set of instruments,
RAM, CPUs & hard drive storage
to process information automatically.
It is basically a calculator on crack because
it can calculate 3*3*3 like a billion times
over and over again, and then change directions, and then decide,
"Oh, I'm going to divide everything by 3,
and 3, and then multiply it again.
And trust me, this is actually something
I have tried to do on a calculator
during Stats class and alas, you cannot
do it without breaking the calculator.
Now, it does this with what we call machine code,
that is exactly like the matrix
and it just consists of 0s and 1s - electricity on, electricity off.
Now, as hardware progressed, we started
developing high level code
that was much easier for dumb humans to read and write,
and ultimately better manipulate our devices.
But that alone doesn't really
sound that special now, does it?
With 0s and 1s it can calculate stuff and take
information and direction from other sources,
like, say, keyboards, mice, and iSmells.
If you don't know what an iSmell is, actually
look it up, just Google DigiScents iSmell,
it's one of the worst inventions ever made, it's incredible.
Anyway, back on track.
So what really does make your computer special?
Well, what really makes your computer special
is what's called an operating system.
Now, without operating systems
we would not be taking this class
and Bill Gates with his Erkil-like glasses
and all would not be the richest
person in the world, off curing diseases
and answering questions on Reddit.
You see, before operating systems,
the only people using computers were
highly technical people that could
actually understand machine code.
They were lab coated, worked out of universities primarily,
and most importantly, there were very, very few of them.
The innovation of the PC era
- PC meaning personal computer,
i.e. any computer you've actually ever
used or touched - was to create a system
whereby a relatively layman user
could manipulate the computer
in the same way a lab coated technician could.
* Don't be jealous that I've been
chatting online with babes, all day *
That invention was the world's
first software, a term used specifically
to contrast with what we've
learned already, which is hardware.
Now, software is an application or
a system of instructions and logic that
exists within the actual hardware
and is used to control the hardware.
Before software, hardware was just... quite dumb.
And so, enter the operating system,
which at first looked not at all
like the operating systems we use today.
I'm not even 100% sure what
the first ever operating system technically was,
it probably has something to do with the thing called a BIOS,
but the first one worth knowing and that caught
on in the mainstream was called MS-DOS.
And yes, I know, there were a couple more
before this, but this was the first one that
actually had millions of people use, or at least see.
Now, the MS and MS-DOS, you can probably guess,
it stands for Microsoft,
and DOS is an attempt to sound kind of "future-y",
and that meant Digital Operating System.
MS-DOS was just a black screen that you could
type commands into to do certain tasks.
When you started up your computer,
it would scream a bunch of jibberish at you,
but eventually it would put up a blinking period,
the universal sign for
"I'm waiting for you to type something."
A universal sign iMessage has since
ruined and I will never forgive for.
Now, in MS-DOS, you had to type in
commands to do what you wanted to do.
So if you wanted to, say, play a game like Minesweeper,
you had to remember the command
for calling up that program and opening it.
You also had to remember where
that program is stored on the computer,
and if you got it wrong, MS-DOS was
not going to help you out at all.
It would just continue to taunt you with that flashing light.
I used to spend hours trying to
remember how to play this game where
you moved blocks, and collected cheese, and trapped cats.
If anyone actually remembers that one,
post in the Q&A, we can reminisce.
Anyway, that was the first operating system that got popular.
Now, a relatively normal and relatively
determined non-lab coated person
could play Minesweeper on MS-DOS, or he could figure out
how to make it do some math calculations.
Now, what was happening behind this
black screen and why was that so special?
Well, it was taking your high level language
instructions and translating it
all the way down to the lowest level of beeps
and boops that the hardware required to run.
People who worked on MS-DOS
would use an even higher level language
to change and manipulate the
operating system, like add functionality,
maybe change a color or something.
I don't know, there really wasn't much functionality to it.
But keep in mind, just the core of the
operating system in any operating system really
is just a lightning quick interpreter.
It interprets something you, the layman human,
can use and speak to something the computer can understand.
Ok, so let's just recap it.
Operating systems are the reason why we use computers today.
Because before them, not very many people could use them,
and the number of things you would
want to use them for were,
well, very few and far between.
Operating systems are a bit like steering wheels.
If you have a steering wheel on your car,
then you don't necessarily need to
understand how exactly the engine works.
Just know when it's broken and
know when you're getting pulled over.
The first operating system to get
mass adoption was called MS-DOS,
made by William Gates himself of Microsoft
and large rimmed glasses fame.
MS-DOS was just a black screen where you typed in commands,
and it looks very similar to the program on Macs called Terminal.
If you guys are on a Mac actually right now,
just type into your spotlight "terminal",
open that up and look at it,
now you'll see exactly what I mean.
It's basically miniature MS-DOS.
Ok, next lecture, we're going to talk
about how operating systems went
from that dumb blinking light to that glossy
over-animated piece of trash called Windows 10.
Also, we're going to talk about how Steve Jobs originally got famous.
All right guys, see you then!